*Aesthetic Programming: A Handbook of Software Studies*

**Preface**

// What kind of book is this?

Reading its subtitle, this book is clearly meant to be a handbook of sorts, but not in any conventional technical sense of it being a prescribed set of instructions (how-to recipe-style book) in order to find out how to do something like coding in a straightforward fashion (for ‘beginners’).[Note: 'For dummies' could also be used but the carries the unfortunate connotation of learning diability.] This handbook is not simply meant to be read in order to learn to code or indeed to offer critical reflection upon the practice of coding alone. Instead, it is something more messy and at the same time ambitious we think: a book to represent a more complex and deeply entangled set of relations between writing and coding as "really useful knowledge".[Note: With reference to nonstandard literacy, and the article:  Marilyn M. Cooper, "Really Useful Knowledge: A Cultural Studies Agenda for Writing Centers," *The Writing Center Journal*, Vol. 14, No. 2 (Spring 1994), pp. 97-111, https://www.jstor.org/stable/43441948]

The book is aimed at those who would like to learn how to read, write and *think* with program code. Most programming books are written with a primary objective of teaching readers how to learn a programming language to become a good (or better) programmer, with an emphasis on state-of-the-art technology, as well as practical examples that are explained and then designed to be deployed in IT-related or creative industries. Not many programming books address the cultural and aesthetic dimensions of programming as a means to think critically and computationally. 

In emerging trans-disciplinary fields involving computational technology -- such as software studies, platform studies, and digital humanities to an extent -- the practice of programming is incorporated into the object of study and yet little practical detail is provided, especially for those studying non-technical or scientific disciplines. This book attempts to address this perceived gap in literature and the growing interest in ‘computational thinking’ to expand programming beyond the confines of computer science and engineering or even the digital humnaities which prresents a set of other limitations. We consider our approach to be distinctive from other programming books that are more focused on programming languages from an engineering perspective, as well as distinctive from other theoretical books where source code becomes an illustration of thinking or too-easy analogy (if not ignored altogether). 

Whilst operating broadly in the spirit of Software Studies,[Note: Software studies is an interdisciplinary research field, which studies software systems and their social and cultural effects, see Matthew Fuller, ed. *Software Studies: A Lexicon*, London: MIT Press, 2008.] the book offers an applied and overtly practice-based approach to understanding the centrality of programming -- the reading, writing and thinking with software -- as a critical tool for our times, in recognition of the way in which our experiences are ever more programmed. It is offered as a deep learning tool -- a handbook for those unaccustomed to programming -- and one that allows for the critical agency of the programmer to develop as they become more proficient in both their technical and conceptual skills.[Note: If tools are invoked here then only in the widest sense.] 

To reiterate, our intention is that readers will acquire key skills of programming in order to read, write and think with, and through, code (we will return to the issue of literacy later). We see that it is important to fully explore the intersections of technical and cultural aspects of code in order to reflect deeply on the pervasiveness of computational culture and its social and cultural effects -- from the language and politics of human-machine languages to datafication and recent developments in automated machine intelligence, for example. In other words, the book embraces both the technical aspect and formal qualities of code as well as critical discourses and thinking around code, including acknowledgement of the material conditions of programming practice, the nonhuman agency of code itself, and its relationality.     

We aim to bridge the gap between theories of computational culture, aesthetics and cultural studies, alongside learning to program. As part of this, we take a particular interest in some of the power relations rarely acknowledged, such as class, gender, race, and the authoritarian logic of command and control built into computational systems. In short, the handbook introduces and demonstrates a distinctive approach through the intersectional and reflexive practice of aesthetic programming as we understand it.

// So why aesthetic programming?

The argument the book follows is that computational culture is not just a trendy subject to study or a way to understand more about what is happening with computational processes, but a as means to engage with programming as an active way to create change. Thus we consider programming to be a cultural practice and phenomenon, a way of thinking and doing in the world, and a means to understand some of the complex procedures that underwrite our lived realities, in order to act upon that reality.  

We consider that the phrase ‘aesthetic programming’ best describes this approach. We claim distinctiveness here, but of course aesethetic programming comes close to other phrases such as ‘creative coding’ and ‘exploratory programming’ that have been introduced in related literature in recent years: to emphasize the expressivity of computer programming beyond something pragmatic and functional, in which cultural production, or critical thinking through the practice pf programming, can be cultivated and developed through learning and understanding it from the broad perspectives of the arts and humanities.[Note: Here we are referring to Maeda, 2004; Peppler & Kafai, 2009; Montfort 2016, Wardrip-Fruin 2012, add more?] It should be explained that the title 'aesthetic programming' derives from one of the undergraduate courses in the Digital Design programme at Aarhus University, which has been taught in parallel to a course in Software Studies since 2013. Together the courses offer ways to think about and with software and computational culture to understand wider political, cultural, social and aesthetic phenomena. We follow the principle that the growing importance of software requires a new kind of cultural thinking (and curriculum) that can account for, and with which to understand better -- from the inside -- the politics and aesthetics of algorithms, loops, variables, and other key concepts. The structure of the book largely emerges from the experience of teaching these parallel courses and we thank all our students and fellow teachers for their valuable contributions and critical feedback along the way. [Note: Special mention whould go to Magda Tyzlik-Carver and Christian Ulrik Andersen who have contributed to the teaching, as well as teaching assistants... add names.] 

To go further, and in specifically invoking aesthetics, it should be clear that we do not refer to ideas of beauty as it is often misunderstood, but to aesthetics at the core of politics, as to what presents itself to sense-making experience and bodily perception (see Jacques Rancière's *The Politics of Aesthetics*, for instance).  [Note:  Jacques Rancière, *The Politics of Aesthetics*, London: Continuum, 2006; investigating what asetehics and politics have in common: the delimitation of the thinkable and the unthinkable, the possible and the impossible.] How we apprehend the world in this sense is not fixed but is in process of endless becoming, much like software itself. 

Aesthetics leads us back to the critical theory of the Frankfurt School too, and in particular the ideas of Theodor Adorno and Walter Benjamin, to enforce the idea that cultural production -- which would include programming for us now -- must be seen in a social context and has a political function. Programming becomes a kind of force-field to understand material conditions and social contradictions, just as the interpretation of art once operated "as a kind of code language for processes taking place within society". [Note: The quote continues: "... which must be deciphered by means of critical analysis." (Martin Jay, *Aesthetic Theory*, 1996: 177).] Technology plays its part here, and the infamous artwork essay by Benjamin becomes a touchstone for dismantling some of the associated myths of artistic production including the dismantling of authenticity and hence the aesthetic experience of its "aura" (the mark of its authenticity and originality). [Note: To quote Benjamin on this point: "The instant the criterion of authenticity ceases to be applicable to artistic production, the total function of art is reversed. Instead of being based on ritual, it begins to be based on another practice - politics." (ref?)] It is worth remembering that Adorno and Benjamin famously disagreed on the consequences of this destruction of 'aura': whilst Benjamin expressed the positive aspects of this shift and the destruction of aura is a kind of political emancipation, Adorno expressed the negative view that standardisation and pseudo-individuality would follow. We can clearly see these tendencies have accelerated with computational culture and hence the continuing need for sharp critique, and one also based on "immanent criticism" -- that which is inherent, as it operates within its object -- in the inner workings of software and its material conditions. [Note: Adorno says it better: "A successful work of art, according to immanent criticism, is one that resolves objective contradictions in a spurious harmony, but one expresses the idea of harmony negatively by embodying the contradictions, pure and uncompromised, in its innermost structure" (Adorno, in *Prisms*, 1967: 32, also quoted in Jay, 1996: 179).] The question remains as to what extent these old (white, male) references are up to the task of unpicking the complexity of computational operations, and address the ways in which most people use computers or think about them. The question is as much to do with what aesthetic programming is becoming as to what it is. 

To address this difficulty we have been working with key concepts from programming as the starting point for our analysis (such as class, function, loop), thereby not reading cultural phenomena in relation to programming concepts but the other way around where the programming leads the discussion through a deep understanding of the way it is constructed and operationalized. This suggests practical understanding and knowledge of programming to underpin critical understanding of techno-cultural systems, often informed by expertise in both fields -- as in the case of Wendy Hui Kyong Chun. [Note: She has studied both Systems Design Engineering and English Literature, which she combines and mutates in her current work on digital media, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wendy_Hui_Kyong_Chun] We hope to encourage more and more people to defy the separation of fields in this way.    

// And software studies?

So we draw heavily upon the field of Software Studies, and to an extent Critical Code Studies -- the work of Wendy Chun and others -- to deal with and communicate knowledge of software as a cultural form via analyses of examples of software artefacts and close readings of theoretical texts. [Note: Critical Code Studies is... coding in tradition of literary criticism ADD MORE] In terms of form we take our cue from Matthew Fuller's *Software Studies: A Lexicon* from 2008, structured literally as a lexicon of key terms, it in turn taking its cue from the Raymond Williams's *Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society* first published in  1958.[Note: Fuller, ed. *Software Studies*; Raymond Williams, *Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society*, London: Fontana, 1983; in 2005 Blackwell published *New Keywords: A Revised Vocabulary of Culture and Society*.] In many ways, and simply put, our book can be thought of as an update of both books -- a further lexicon -- but with far more attention to the culture of software from the inside, but also like any lexicon, as a way to attest to the ways in which words exert power through meanings and also through their actions as instructions. In this respect it is also important to recognise that the book Software Studies derives from an earlier workshop, and it is worth quoting the project page for its clarity of intention: 

"[T]he project aims at folding the internalist/externalist question of science studies inside out, the mechanisms of the one conjugating the subject of the other: what does software-enabled scholarship, in software, art and literary practice have to say about its own medium? The purpose of this interaction is not therefore to stage some revelation of a supposed hidden truth of software, to unmask its esoteric reality, but to see what it is and what it can be coupled with: a rich seam of paradoxical conjunctions in which the speed and rationality of computation meets with its ostensible outside." [Note: The project workshop description an be found archived at https://web.archive.org/web/20100327185154/http://pzwart.wdka.hro.nl/mdr/Seminars2/softstudworkshop]

Like this, we believe that paying attention to key concepts from programming offers the possibility to open up new insights into aesthetics and critical theory, and new perspectives on cultural phenomena increasingly bound to computational logic. In extending the discussion, beyond formal logic, we also emphasise the usefulness of artistic practice to open up more speculative and alternative imaginaries. In this spirit, and in keeping with the development of software studies in Europe at least, we take inspiration from what has been referred to as 'software art' although admittedly the category was only meant as a temporary holding position [Note: In particular we might cite the influence of the Readme festival... add more on this. Importantly here perhaps is to emphasise that the category of art in itself becomes inadequate to cover the kinds of creatives practices that have developed in the field.] That we draw upon examples from artistic and critical design practices as part of our argument, including works by one of the authors Winnie Soon, stresses our point that programming is not simply a practical tool that produces an artwork but -- like poetry or performance art -- is a critical-aesthetic object in itself. [Note: Critical Code studies makes this explicit.] As media theorist Tilman Baumgärtel once neatly clarified:
"Software art is not art that has been created with the help of a computer but art that happens in the computer. Software is not programmed by artists, in order to produce autonomous work, but the software itself is the artwork. What is crucial here is not the result but the process triggered in the computer by the program code." (cited in Cox, 2007, 150)

In order to discuss the expressivity and aesthetic dimensions of code and computational processes, we incorporate artistic works that explore the material conditions of software and operations of computational processes as practical and theoretical examples. They are part of oyr argument in other words as well as usefully demonstarte some of the ideas in prcatice. We might add, and repeating what has already been introduced, that we are not simply interested in a critical aesthetics of programming but also programming as critical aesthetics. This comes with a challenge over language as has also been expressed thus far, or what we might call an *expanded literacy* as the ability to read, write, *and program*. 

// Programming literacy

Literacy is important here to explain how new kinds of reading and writing are required to account for significant cultural and technical changes. To clarify we can refer back to the beginnings of cultural studies as a field, and Richard Hoggart's "Uses of Literacy" (published in 1957) that included working class cultures as part of what we call culture that was previously the preserve of an elite, and thereby introducing an expanded and politicised notion of literacy. [Note: Richard Hoggart, *The Uses of Literacy: Aspects of Working Class Life*, London: Penguin, 2009 [1957].] Clearly literacy is a shifting notion, changing across culture and  and underpinned by the changing relations between speaking and writing, also explored by Walter J. Ong in *Orality and Literacy*, who argued that the electronic age has sharpened our understanding through the "secondary orality" of media communications that all depend on writing in various ways.[Note: Walter J. Ong (2002 [1982]) *Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word*, London: Routledge.] The written words of computing, for instance, demonstrate how our language has been further enhanced by new forms, and how writing is a form of action and not simply a referent of thinking.[Note: We will return to the analogy between speech and programming in later chapters; see also Geoff Cox & Alex McLean, *Speaking Code: Coding as Aesthetic and Political Expression*, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013).] In this book we weave together the words and actions of human and computer languages although recognise that they are not equivalents as such. 

[[[[[[[Winnie: CAN YOU ADD SOMETHING AROUND IN THIS SECTION ON JAVASCRIPT? The programming language JavaScript is introduced alongside core programming concepts as material for thinking with, and for thinking through complex ideas and dynamic concepts. AND MAYBE STRUCTURE OF CHAPTERS IN TEERMS OF INTRODUCTION OF KEY PROGRAMMING IDEAS] 

This discussion of programming or coding as a necessary skill for contemporary life is compelling, and there are plenty of examples of initiatives related to computational literacy and thinking, from online tutorials to websites such as Codecademy.org and Code.org. *Coding Literacy* by Annette Vee is a useful attempt to grapple with these connections, arguing how the concept of literacy underscores the importance, flexibility, and power of writing for and with computers.[Note: Annette Vee, *Coding Literacy: How Computer Programming Is Changing Writing*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017.] An important aspect of this is that not only does this help us to better understand the social, technical and cultural dynamics of programming but also expands our very notion of literacy and its connection to a politics of exclusion like other literacies. Furthermore, and given that programming is a form of writing that necessarily performs actions, it presents itself as way to reconceive politics too: not simply writing or speaking, arguing or protesting, but also demonstrating the ability to modify the technical layer through which the action is performed, in recognition of the ways in which power and control are now structured. [Note: This point largely derives from Christopher Kelty's  *Two Bits: the Cultural Significance of Free Software*, Durham: Duke University Press, 2008; he uses the phrase "running code" to describe the relationship between "argument-by-technology and argument-by-talk" (58). Clearly programmers are able to make arguments like other rhetorical forms, see Kevin Brock, *Rhetorical Code Studies: Discovering Arguments in and around Code*, Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press, 2019.] 

// The book

More to the point, text is in code (in the ways that it is made human-readable) and code is in text (in the use of the text editor, interfaces and online platforms we use to render these thoughts). There is more to say on this, and we will return to these issues across the various chapters of the book. Suffice to say for now that the ways that writing and coding are entangled is what this book sets out to express, and neither are to be privileged over the other: we learn from their relationality. Writing code and writing about code are forced together in ways that reflect broader cultural and technical shifts in data practices and open publishing initiatives, and moreover to emphasise that writing a book is necessarily a work in progress. In other words, this is a book to be read and acted upon, rewritten and recoded. 

Our use of a git repository for our writing further emphasises this point, and how by treating writing as software, or indeed software as writing, it allows us to formalise the production of the book as an iterative process, in need of timely updates and endless rethinking. In allowing for new versions to be produced by others, we hope in a modest way to challenge commercial publishing conventions and illuminate our capacity to understand some of the infrastructures through which we encode our ideas and distribute them over networks. In this way, we aim to expose something clsoe to what Adrian Mackenzie has identified as “auto-archaeology” to indicate how the object of study is fully integrated into the analysis.[see Adrian Mackenzie’s "Preface" to *Machine Learners: Archaeology of a Data Practice*, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2017; An insight into the background thinking of his *Machine Learners* can be found on the associated GitLab site at https://github.com/datapractice/machinelearners.] 

[[[[[[[[[ ADD Culture of Github/Gitlab
// include discussion of Git, acronym or not
Matthew Fuller, Andrew Goffey, Adrian Mackenzie, Richard Mills and Stuart Sharples, "Big Diff, Granularity, Incoherence, and Production in the Github Software Repository" in How To Be a Geek: Essays on the Culture of Software.]]]]]]]]

There are clearly many precedents for this approach in software production, and evidently free and open source principles underscore our approach. It is worth emphasising that FOSS development is a collective practice that challenges the normative relations of production associated with commercial development which can be extended to the production of books and the associated reputation economy of academic publishing. Having said that we also recognise that the release of source code and open access books represents a number of ambiguities related to the sharing economy, free market capitalism and opportunities to capitalise on free labour. However we persist in the hope that our efforts challenge market logic, and as such are inspired by the feminist and copyleft principles of groups like Constant in Brussels, and the associated open source publishing initiative (OSP) who we have collaborated with on the design this book. 

[[[[[[[[[[[ADD The perversity of writing a book about coding does not go unnoticed either, especially when chunks of code are displayed on the page...
(find notes on this).]]]]]]]]]

We acknowledge numerous experimental publishing initiatives and even anti-platforms such as dokieli for decentralised article publishing.[Note: dokieli is a clientside editor for decentralised article publishing, annotations and social interactions, see https://dokie.li/] Our publisher, Open Humanities Press, is more pragmatic but reflects these broad principles of transparency and reproducibility in its commitment to radical open access for scholarly work. [note: add links to OSP and OHP] As such this book can be downloaded for free or purchased as a hard copy at a very reasonable price. 

As such the book is not simply a physical object that you might be holding in your hands as you read these words, but a computational and networked object too, distributed across various other spaces and temporalities, and made available to both readers and writers alike. Indeed, in saying this we might refer to Benjamin again, from his essay “The Author as Producer": “The reader is always prepared to become a writer, in the sense of being one who describes or prescribes. [...] And writing about work makes up part of the skill necessary to perform it. Authority to write is no longer founded in a specialist training but in a polytechnical one, and so becomes common property.” (1973) 90. This is our point too. The book expresses itself as a dynamic object not fixed in terms of authorship or commodity form. It follows that, although this preface is only the beginning of the book, there is no end: the book is purposefully stuck in an endless loop of its own becoming. 

